# Object

## Methods

### equals()
**equals() is a method of Object class, it used to compare the addresses of two objects.**
```java
public boolean equals(Object obj) {
        return (this == obj);
    }
```

**If we want to compare the contents of two objects, we need to override .equals() method:**

1. check the address of two objects, if equal, return true
2. check the data type of two objects, using keyword instanceof
3. check the content as needed, if equal, return true

**String class has already overriden its .equals() method.**
```java
public boolean equals(Object anObject) {
	    // 1. check the address of two objects, if equal, return true
        if (this == anObject) {
            return true;
        }
        // 2. check the data type of two objects, using keyword instanceof
        if (anObject instanceof String) {
        	// 3. check the content as needed, if equal, return true
            String anotherString = (String)anObject;
            int n = value.length;
            if (n == anotherString.value.length) {
                char v1[] = value;
                char v2[] = anotherString.value;
                int i = 0;
                while (n-- != 0) {
                    if (v1[i] != v2[i])
                        return false;
                    i++;
                }
                return true;
            }
        }
        // otherwise, return false
        return false;
    }
``` 

#### What is the difference between == operator and .equals() method?
##### == operator
**For primitive types, we use == for content comparison; For objects, we use == for address comparison**, == checks if both objects point to the same memory location.

##### .equals() method
**For objects, we use .equals() method for content comparison**, .equals() evaluates to the comparison of values in the objects.

If a class does not override the equals method, then by default it uses equals(Object o) method of the closest parent class that has overridden this method. 

### hashCode()
**hashCode() returns an integer value, generated by a hashing algorithm.**

The contract between equals() and hashCode() is:
1. **If two objects are equal, then they must have the same hash code.**
2. **If two objects have the same hash code, they may or may not be equal.**

The idea behind a Map is to be able to find an object faster than a linear search. Using hashed keys to locate objects is a two-step process. Internally, the HashMap is implemented as an array of Entry objects. Each Entry has a pair and a pointer pointing to the next Entry. The hash code of the key object is the index for addressing the array. This locates the linked list of Entries in that cell of the array. The linked list in the cell is then searched linearly by using equals() to determine if two objects are equal.

The default implementation of hashCode() in Object class returns distinct integers for different objects. Therefore, the second apple has a different hash code.

The HashMap is organized like a sequence of buckets. The key objects are put into different buckets. It takes time of O(1) to get to the right bucket because it is an array access with the index. Therefore, it's a good practice to evenly distribute the objects into those buckets, i.e., having a hashCode() method that produces evenly distributed hash code. (Not the main point here though)

### finalize method
**It is a method that the Garbage Collector always calls just before the deletion/destroying the object** which is eligible for Garbage Collection, so as to perform clean-up activity.

in our class clean-up activities are there, then **we have to override this method to define our own clean-up activities.**

```java
class Hello { 
    public static void main(String[] args) 
    { 
        String s = new String("RR"); 
        s = null; 
  
        // Requesting JVM to call Garbage Collector method 
        System.gc(); 
        System.out.println("Main Completes"); 
    } 
  
    // Here overriding finalize method 
    public void finalize() 
    { 
        System.out.println("finalize method overriden"); 
    } 
} 
```
